Internship Project Report on
Risk Factor Analysis of Heart Disease
Submitted in partial fulfilment for the Award of the Internship
Bachelor of Computer Application
VI Semester
2026
Bangalore University
Under the Guidance
Internal Guide
Mr. SANTHOSH KUMAR S
Assistant Professor
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER APPLICATIONS
Administrative Management College
SUBMITTED BY
Anushka Sharma
Register No: ________________

CERTIFICATE OF INTERNSHIP
06-04-2026
TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN
This is to certify that Ms. Anushka Sharma, a student of Administrative Management College, Bannerghatta Road, studying Bachelor of Computer Application, VI Semester, affiliated to Bangalore University, Bangalore, has successfully completed a one-month Internship Programme on Risk Factor Analysis of Heart Disease at KSR Enterprises from 2nd March 2026 to 3rd April 2026 at our office premises, Bengaluru.
During the tenure of her Internship Programme with us, Ms. Anushka Sharma demonstrated a commendable work ethic and was found to be hardworking, sincere, and punctual. She actively contributed to assigned health-data analysis exercises and exhibited a keen willingness to learn statistical interpretation, risk-factor comparison, and model-based feature importance.
We wish Ms. Anushka Sharma all the very best in her future academic and professional endeavours.
Yours faithfully,
For KSR Enterprises,
Authorised Signatory
S.L.A TRADERS
This certificate is issued on behalf of KSR Enterprises and is valid only with an authorised signature and company seal.

ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT COLLEGE
18th Km, Bannerghatta Road, Bangalore-560083
DEPARTMENT OF COMPUTER APPLICATIONS
BACHELOR OF COMPUTER APPLICATION
CERTIFICATE
This is to certify that the Internship project titled "Risk Factor Analysis of Heart Disease" was successfully completed by ANUSHKA SHARMA bearing register number ________________ of VI Semester Bachelor of Computer Application as prescribed by Bangalore University for the academic year 2025-2026 under our guidance and supervision.
Signature of the guide                                      Head of the Department
(Signature with seal)
Date of examination:
Examiners:
1.  _______________________
2.  _______________________

DECLARATION
I hereby declare that the project being submitted entitled "RISK FACTOR ANALYSIS OF HEART DISEASE" for the partial fulfilment for the award of the "Bachelor of Computer Application" degree is an authenticated record of work carried out by me in the 6th semester of BCA and submitted to ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT COLLEGE, BANGALORE.
Under the guidance and supervision of Mr. SANTHOSH KUMAR S, Assistant Professor, AMC.
Thanking You,
ANUSHKA SHARMA
[________________]

ADMINISTRATIVE MANAGEMENT COLLEGE
18th Km, Bannerghatta Road, Bangalore-560083
Department of Computer Applications - BCA
Internship Day Book
Student Name and Register No: ANUSHKA SHARMA (________________)
Company Name: KSR Enterprises
Address: Bengaluru
SL NO
DATE
ACTIVITIES / WORK DONE
1
02-03-2026
Internship orientation, company introduction, and discussion of the heart disease risk analysis project.
2
03-03-2026
Overview of healthcare datasets, clinical attributes, and ethical handling of patient-related data.
3
04-03-2026
Study of heart disease risk factors such as age, cholesterol, blood pressure, smoking, diabetes, and obesity.
4
05-03-2026
Understanding dataset columns, target variable, numerical fields, categorical fields, and missing values.
5
06-03-2026
Data entry and cleaning practice: checking duplicates, blank records, invalid values, and inconsistent labels.
6
07-03-2026
Exploratory analysis of age distribution, cholesterol range, resting blood pressure, and maximum heart rate.
7
09-03-2026
Creating summary tables to compare heart disease presence across gender, age group, and lifestyle factors.
8
10-03-2026
Learning correlation analysis and interpretation of positive, negative, and weak relationships.
9
11-03-2026
Preparing a correlation matrix for numerical variables and identifying high-impact indicators.
10
12-03-2026
Introduction to feature importance and why model-based ranking supports risk-factor interpretation.
11
13-03-2026
Data preprocessing: encoding categorical variables, scaling numerical values, and splitting data.
12
14-03-2026
Building a baseline logistic regression model for heart disease classification.
13
16-03-2026
Evaluating model output using accuracy, confusion matrix, precision, recall, and F1-score.
14
17-03-2026
Building a tree-based model to compare feature importance with correlation results.
15
18-03-2026
Studying the importance of cholesterol, blood pressure, age, chest pain type, and exercise angina.
16
19-03-2026
Preparing visual charts for top risk factors and comparing different groups.
17
20-03-2026
Understanding limitations of correlation, feature importance, and observational healthcare datasets.
18
21-03-2026
Preparing dashboard-style summary pages for risk factors and model findings.
19
23-03-2026
Writing methodology notes covering data collection, cleaning, EDA, correlation, and modelling.
20
24-03-2026
Documenting formulas, assumptions, and interpretation rules used in analysis.
21
25-03-2026
Testing whether charts and tables match cleaned dataset counts and calculated values.
22
26-03-2026
Preparing insight notes on which factors contribute most to heart disease risk.
23
27-03-2026
Learning report export, figure placement, and presentation of health analytics findings.
24
28-03-2026
Reviewing data privacy, anonymisation, file naming, and documentation standards.
25
30-03-2026
Drafting internship report chapters, literature survey notes, and project explanation.
26
31-03-2026
Preparing final report content, conclusion, and bibliography references.
27
01-04-2026
Final review of the analysis workflow, internship learning outcomes, and report checklist.
28
02-04-2026
Discussion of improvements such as larger datasets, clinical validation, and explainable AI.
29
03-04-2026
Completion of company-side formalities and collection of internship completion certificate.

Mr. SANTHOSH KUMAR S                     Dr. Aruna Akula                                       Dr. DVSSR PRAKASH
Assistant Professor                         HOD                                            Principal
AMC COLLEGE                              AMC COLLEGE                                  AMC COLLEGE

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Apart from my efforts, the source of this internship project depends largely on the encouragement and guidance of many others. I take this opportunity to express my sincere gratitude to everyone who supported me during the successful completion of this internship report.
I would like to express my sincere thanks to our beloved Principal Dr. DVSSR PRAKASH, who has been a leading light of our institution and has encouraged students to develop practical professional skills along with academic learning.
I would like to acknowledge my gratitude to our Head of the Department, Dr. Aruna Akula, Department of Computer Applications, for her encouragement and support. Her guidance helped me understand the value of discipline, documentation, and continuous learning during the internship.
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my guide Mr. SANTHOSH KUMAR S, Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Applications, for his valuable suggestions and support throughout this work. His guidance helped me shape the topic of Risk Factor Analysis of Heart Disease into a clear and useful academic report.
I also thank KSR Enterprises for providing me the opportunity to complete an internship in the area of healthcare data analysis. The exposure helped me understand how patient-related datasets can be studied responsibly to identify important risk patterns.
Further, I would like to thank all professors of Computer Applications for their help and suggestions. I extend my special thanks to my parents and family members for their love and support.
Place: Bangalore                                                                                                             ANUSHKA SHARMA
(________________)

ABSTRACT
The internship project titled Risk Factor Analysis of Heart Disease presents a structured analytical study of the major factors associated with heart disease risk. The project focuses on understanding which factors contribute most by analysing variables such as age, cholesterol, resting blood pressure, smoking habit, diabetes, body mass index, maximum heart rate, chest pain type, exercise-induced angina, and other clinical indicators.
The project follows a complete data analytics workflow that includes data collection, data cleaning, exploratory data analysis, correlation study, model preparation, feature importance calculation, result interpretation, and reporting. Correlation analysis is used to understand the direction and strength of relationships between numerical variables and the disease outcome. Feature importance is used to identify the variables that contribute most strongly when a classification model is trained.
The study explains that heart disease risk is rarely caused by one factor alone. Instead, risk is influenced by a combination of demographic, clinical, and lifestyle factors. Age, cholesterol, blood pressure, diabetes, smoking, exercise-related symptoms, and heart-rate response can all provide useful signals when analysed together.
This internship at KSR Enterprises helped me gain practical exposure to healthcare analytics and risk-factor interpretation. The report is prepared as a complete academic record of the internship, following the required format and front matter structure.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
No.
Chapter
Page No.
1.
INTRODUCTION
1-4
2.
COMPANY PROFILE
5-6
3.
LITERATURE SURVEY
7-11
4.
REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATIONS
12-16
5.
DATA ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY
17-22
6.
ANALYTICAL TOOL DESIGN
23-28
7.
IMPLEMENTATION
29-35
8.
ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
36-38
9.
SNAPSHOTS
39-40
10.
INTERNSHIP LEARNING OUTCOMES
41-42
11.
CONCLUSION
43-44
12.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
45

INTRODUCTION
1.1 Project Overview
Risk Factor Analysis of Heart Disease is a healthcare analytics project that studies which attributes contribute most to the possibility of heart disease. The project uses patient-level variables such as age, cholesterol, blood pressure, smoking, diabetes, body mass index, chest pain type, maximum heart rate, and exercise-related symptoms to understand risk patterns.
The central idea of the project is to move beyond simple observation and identify the factors that actually carry stronger signals. For this purpose, the report uses exploratory data analysis, correlation analysis, and feature importance from machine learning models.
The project is not intended to replace medical diagnosis. It is an academic analytics study that demonstrates how data can support understanding, screening, and decision support when interpreted responsibly.
To study important factors associated with heart disease.
To use correlation analysis for understanding relationships among variables.
To use feature importance for identifying the strongest predictive attributes.

INTRODUCTION
1.2 Need for Heart Disease Risk Analysis
Heart disease remains one of the major health concerns across the world. Many risk factors develop gradually and may not show immediate symptoms. Data analysis can help identify patterns in historical patient data and support awareness about the conditions that require attention.
Risk-factor analysis is useful because it helps healthcare professionals and researchers understand which variables should be monitored closely. Factors such as high cholesterol, elevated blood pressure, smoking, diabetes, obesity, and increasing age are commonly associated with cardiovascular risk.
An analytical approach allows these factors to be studied together instead of separately. This is important because a person may have moderate values in several variables, and the combined effect may still indicate significant risk.
Supports early awareness of high-risk groups.
Helps compare clinical and lifestyle indicators.
Creates a structured basis for preventive health discussions.

INTRODUCTION
1.3 Objectives of the Project
The primary objective is to identify which features contribute most to heart disease risk in a structured dataset. The project examines both numerical variables and categorical variables and compares their relationship with the target outcome.
Another objective is to understand the difference between correlation and feature importance. Correlation measures linear relationship, while feature importance from models can capture more complex contribution patterns. Using both techniques gives a more balanced view.
The project also aims to improve practical skills in data cleaning, exploratory analysis, visualisation, model preparation, and interpretation of healthcare data.
Clean and prepare a heart disease dataset.
Analyse age, cholesterol, blood pressure, smoking, diabetes, BMI, and related factors.
Generate correlation matrix and feature-importance ranking.
Prepare a clear report explaining the most influential factors.

INTRODUCTION
1.4 Scope of the Project
The scope of this project includes data preprocessing, exploratory analysis, correlation study, classification modelling, feature-importance comparison, and final interpretation. The report focuses on identifying risk patterns and explaining them in an understandable way.
The project may use public or sample heart disease datasets where personal details are removed. The analysis is limited to the variables available in the dataset, and the findings should be interpreted as data-driven observations rather than clinical proof.
The scope also includes documentation of limitations. Healthcare data can be affected by sample size, missing values, measurement method, and population differences. These issues are considered while explaining results.
Clinical indicators: cholesterol, blood pressure, heart rate, chest pain, ECG-related fields.
Lifestyle indicators: smoking, diabetes, exercise habits, obesity or BMI.
Statistical techniques: correlation and distribution analysis.
Machine learning interpretation: model-based feature importance.

COMPANY PROFILE
2.1 Host Organisation
The internship was completed at KSR Enterprises, Bengaluru, as certified in the internship completion document. The company provided the environment for learning and applying the project topic of Risk Factor Analysis of Heart Disease. The certificate confirms that the internship programme was conducted from 2nd March 2026 to 3rd April 2026.
The internship environment helped in understanding how data analysis projects are planned, documented, and presented. Even when working with sample healthcare data, the analyst must follow a careful process because interpretation can influence how readers understand health-related risk.
During the internship, the focus was on learning the steps of health-data analysis: data understanding, cleaning, exploratory analysis, correlation, model building, feature ranking, and report preparation.
Company Name: KSR Enterprises.
Location: Bengaluru.
Internship Area: Risk Factor Analysis of Heart Disease.
Duration: 2nd March 2026 to 3rd April 2026.

COMPANY PROFILE
2.2 Internship Role and Responsibilities
The internship role involved learning how to study a structured dataset and prepare a meaningful analytical report. The work began with understanding the dataset fields and continued with cleaning, transformation, visualisation, and interpretation.
A key responsibility was to avoid unsupported conclusions. In healthcare analytics, an analyst must clearly separate statistical association from medical diagnosis. The project therefore presents findings as risk indicators and not as final clinical decisions.
Another responsibility was to communicate results clearly through tables, charts, and explanation. The report must help readers understand why variables such as age, cholesterol, blood pressure, smoking, and diabetes are important.
Study dataset structure and variables.
Clean missing, duplicate, and inconsistent records.
Perform correlation and feature-importance analysis.
Prepare documentation and internship report chapters.

LITERATURE SURVEY
3.1 Overview of Heart Disease
Heart disease refers to a group of conditions affecting the heart and blood vessels. Coronary artery disease, heart failure, arrhythmia, and other cardiovascular conditions are common examples. Many cases are influenced by a combination of biological, behavioural, and environmental factors.
Risk factors are conditions or behaviours that increase the probability of disease. Some factors, such as age and family history, cannot be changed. Others, such as smoking, high cholesterol, blood pressure, diabetes control, physical inactivity, and obesity, can often be managed through lifestyle or treatment.
Data analysis helps study these factors across a group of records. By comparing patient attributes with disease outcomes, analysts can identify which variables show stronger association with heart disease.

LITERATURE SURVEY
3.2 Major Risk Factors
Age is a major risk factor because cardiovascular risk generally increases as people grow older. Cholesterol is important because high levels can contribute to plaque formation in arteries. Blood pressure is important because long-term hypertension puts additional strain on the heart and blood vessels.
Smoking can damage blood vessels and reduce oxygen supply. Diabetes can affect blood vessels and increase cardiovascular complications. Body mass index and obesity are also relevant because they are linked with metabolic stress, blood pressure, and cholesterol levels.
Clinical symptoms such as chest pain type, exercise-induced angina, maximum heart rate, and ST depression can provide important diagnostic signals in many heart disease datasets.
Age and gender.
Cholesterol and blood pressure.
Smoking, diabetes, and BMI.
Chest pain type and exercise-related symptoms.
Maximum heart rate and ECG-related measurements.

LITERATURE SURVEY
3.3 Correlation Analysis
Correlation analysis measures the strength and direction of relationship between variables. A positive correlation means that two variables tend to increase together, while a negative correlation means that one tends to decrease when the other increases.
In heart disease analysis, correlation can show whether variables such as age, cholesterol, resting blood pressure, and maximum heart rate are related to the target outcome. However, correlation does not prove causation. It only indicates association in the available data.
Correlation is most useful as an exploratory technique. It helps identify variables that deserve closer inspection before building predictive models.

LITERATURE SURVEY
3.4 Feature Importance
Feature importance explains how much each input variable contributes to a model's predictions. Tree-based models such as decision trees, random forests, and gradient boosting models can estimate the relative importance of features by observing how much they improve decision splits.
Feature importance is useful because some variables may not show strong linear correlation but may still help prediction when combined with other variables. For example, chest pain type may interact with age or exercise-related variables in a meaningful way.
The project uses feature importance to rank variables and compare them with correlation results. A factor that appears important in both methods can be considered a strong analytical signal.

LITERATURE SURVEY
3.5 Related Analytical Techniques
Exploratory data analysis is used to understand the dataset before modelling. It includes summary statistics, missing-value checks, distribution charts, and comparison of disease and non-disease groups.
Classification models such as logistic regression, decision tree, random forest, and support vector machine can be used to predict whether heart disease is present. For this academic project, models are used mainly to support interpretation of risk factors.
Model evaluation metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, and confusion matrix help understand performance. In healthcare, recall is important because missing a positive case can be more serious than a false alarm.

REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATIONS
4.1 Functional Requirements
The project must import a structured heart disease dataset, clean it, analyse it, and generate meaningful findings. The system should support basic statistical summaries, charts, correlation matrix, and feature-importance ranking.
The analysis should allow comparison of patients with and without heart disease. It should show how important variables differ between groups and which variables contribute most to predictive models.
The final report should clearly explain the methods and findings so that a reader can understand the risk-factor ranking without needing to inspect the raw dataset.
Load dataset from CSV or Excel file.
Clean missing, duplicate, and inconsistent records.
Generate descriptive statistics and visual charts.
Calculate correlation values.
Train a model and extract feature importance.

REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATIONS
4.2 Non-Functional Requirements
The analysis should be accurate, repeatable, readable, and responsible. Accuracy means that calculations should match the cleaned dataset. Repeatability means that the same steps can be run again if the dataset changes.
Readability is important because reports must be understood by academic evaluators and non-technical readers. Charts and tables should use clear labels, meaningful titles, and consistent formatting.
Responsibility is especially important in health analytics. The report should not claim to diagnose disease. It should explain that the output is an analytical study based on available data.
Accuracy: validated calculations and model results.
Usability: simple charts and clear interpretation.
Maintainability: documented cleaning and modelling steps.
Ethics: anonymised data and responsible language.

REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATIONS
4.3 Hardware Requirements
The hardware requirements for this project are modest. A normal laptop can handle a typical heart disease dataset because such datasets usually contain hundreds or thousands of rows rather than millions of records.
More memory is helpful if additional models or large datasets are used. A stable system also supports smooth chart preparation, report writing, and presentation work.
The following table summarises the recommended hardware configuration.
Component
Recommended Specification
Processor
Intel Core i3 / AMD equivalent or higher
RAM
8 GB recommended
Storage
20 GB free disk space
Display
1366 x 768 minimum, Full HD recommended
Network
Broadband connection for references and documentation

REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATIONS
4.4 Software Requirements
The software requirements include tools for data cleaning, analysis, modelling, visualisation, and documentation. Python is suitable for correlation and feature importance because it provides libraries such as pandas, NumPy, scikit-learn, matplotlib, and seaborn.
Excel or Power BI can also be used for summary tables and visual reporting. Word is used for report preparation, while PowerPoint can be used for presenting major findings.
The following software configuration was considered for the project.
Software
Purpose
Python
Data cleaning, EDA, correlation, modelling, and feature importance
pandas and NumPy
Data manipulation and numerical operations
scikit-learn
Model building and evaluation
matplotlib and seaborn
Charts, heatmaps, and visual analysis
Microsoft Excel
Initial review and summary tables
Microsoft Word
Internship report preparation

REQUIREMENTS SPECIFICATIONS
4.5 Dataset Requirements
The dataset should contain a target variable indicating whether heart disease is present or absent. It should also include important risk factors such as age, sex, cholesterol, blood pressure, fasting blood sugar, maximum heart rate, chest pain type, exercise angina, and lifestyle indicators such as smoking if available.
The data should be checked for missing values, outliers, duplicate records, invalid categories, and impossible clinical values. For example, negative cholesterol or unrealistic blood pressure values should be reviewed.
The dataset must be anonymised. Personally identifiable information is not required for this type of risk-factor analysis.
Target variable: heart disease presence or risk class.
Numerical fields: age, cholesterol, resting blood pressure, BMI, heart rate.
Categorical fields: gender, smoking status, diabetes, chest pain type, exercise angina.
Minimum number of records sufficient for meaningful comparison.

DATA ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY
5.1 Analytics Lifecycle
The methodology begins with understanding the research question: which factors contribute most to heart disease risk? After the question is defined, the dataset is collected, reviewed, cleaned, and transformed.
Exploratory data analysis is then performed to understand distributions and group differences. Correlation analysis is used for numerical relationships, and classification models are trained to estimate feature importance.
The final stage is interpretation. The project compares statistical findings with medical risk-factor knowledge and presents the results in a balanced manner.
Understand the question.
Prepare and clean data.
Explore distributions and group differences.
Calculate correlation matrix.
Train model and rank feature importance.
Interpret and document findings.

DATA ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY
5.2 Data Collection
Data collection involves selecting a structured dataset containing heart disease outcome and related patient attributes. Public datasets are useful for academic projects because they are already anonymised and commonly used for learning.
Before analysis, each column is reviewed to understand its meaning. The analyst identifies whether a variable is numerical, categorical, binary, or ordinal. This decision affects cleaning, encoding, and modelling.
The collected data is preserved as a raw file, while cleaned and processed versions are stored separately for reproducibility.

DATA ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY
5.3 Data Cleaning
Data cleaning removes errors that can mislead analysis. Missing values are identified, duplicate rows are checked, and incorrect values are reviewed. Categorical labels are standardised so that the same meaning is not split across multiple spellings.
Numerical values are checked for unrealistic ranges. For example, cholesterol, blood pressure, and BMI should be within medically possible limits. Outliers are reviewed carefully rather than removed automatically.
After cleaning, counts and summary statistics are compared with the original dataset to confirm that valid records were not lost.
Remove duplicate records after verification.
Handle missing values using appropriate method.
Standardise categorical labels.
Check clinical ranges and outliers.
Preserve raw data separately from cleaned data.

DATA ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY
5.4 Exploratory Data Analysis
Exploratory data analysis helps understand the structure of the dataset. It includes checking age distribution, cholesterol distribution, blood pressure range, gender count, smoking groups, diabetes groups, and disease outcome balance.
Group comparison is important. The analyst compares average cholesterol, average blood pressure, average age, and smoking proportion between heart disease and non-heart disease groups.
Charts such as histograms, boxplots, bar charts, and count plots help identify visible patterns before formal modelling.

DATA ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY
5.5 Correlation Method
Correlation analysis is applied mainly to numerical variables. Pearson correlation may be used when variables are continuous and approximately linear. Spearman correlation may be useful when the relationship is monotonic or variables are ordinal.
The correlation matrix shows the relationship among all numerical variables. A heatmap can make the matrix easier to read by using colour intensity to represent strength.
The target variable can also be included after encoding it as 0 and 1. This helps show which numerical variables have stronger direct association with disease presence.

DATA ANALYSIS METHODOLOGY
5.6 Feature Importance Method
Feature importance is obtained after training a classification model. Tree-based models such as random forest are useful because they can rank variables based on their contribution to splitting the data.
Before modelling, categorical variables are encoded and the dataset is split into training and testing parts. The model is trained on the training data and evaluated on the test data.
The final ranking is compared with correlation results. If age, cholesterol, blood pressure, or smoking appears high in both methods, the confidence in their relevance increases.

ANALYTICAL TOOL DESIGN
6.1 Data Preparation Design
The data preparation design keeps the raw dataset unchanged and creates a cleaned version for analysis. This protects the original data and allows the analyst to repeat the workflow if needed.
Columns are renamed with clear labels such as Age, Cholesterol, Resting_BP, Smoking, Diabetes, BMI, Max_Heart_Rate, Chest_Pain_Type, Exercise_Angina, and Target. This improves readability in code, charts, and report tables.
A data dictionary is prepared to explain each field, its type, and its meaning.

ANALYTICAL TOOL DESIGN
6.2 Variable Design
Variables are divided into numerical, categorical, and target fields. Numerical variables include age, cholesterol, resting blood pressure, BMI, and maximum heart rate. Categorical variables include smoking status, gender, diabetes status, chest pain type, and exercise angina.
The target variable represents whether heart disease is present. It is usually encoded as 0 for absence and 1 for presence. This format supports correlation analysis and classification modelling.
Separating variables by type is important because each type requires a different processing method.
Variable Type
Examples
Numerical
Age, cholesterol, resting BP, BMI, max heart rate
Categorical
Gender, smoking, diabetes, chest pain type
Target
Heart disease presence or absence
Derived
Age group, cholesterol category, BP category

ANALYTICAL TOOL DESIGN
6.3 Correlation Output Design
The correlation output is designed as a matrix and a ranked table. The matrix shows relationships among all numerical variables, while the ranked table focuses on each variable's relationship with the target outcome.
A heatmap is useful because it allows the reader to quickly identify strong positive or negative relationships. However, the report also explains the exact values because colour alone may be misleading.
Correlation values are interpreted carefully. A low correlation does not always mean that a variable is useless, because the relationship may be non-linear or dependent on another factor.

ANALYTICAL TOOL DESIGN
6.4 Model Design
The model design begins with a baseline logistic regression model because it is interpretable and suitable for binary classification. A tree-based model is then used to calculate feature importance.
The dataset is divided into training and testing sets to evaluate whether the model generalises beyond the data it learned from. Basic metrics such as accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score are reported.
The model is not presented as a clinical diagnostic tool. It is used as an analytical method to support ranking of risk factors.

ANALYTICAL TOOL DESIGN
6.5 Feature Importance Output Design
Feature importance is presented as a sorted bar chart and a table. The most important variables appear at the top so that the reader can quickly identify major contributors.
The ranking may include age, cholesterol, blood pressure, chest pain type, maximum heart rate, smoking, diabetes, exercise angina, and BMI depending on the dataset. The exact ranking can change based on data quality and model choice.
The report compares the ranking with known medical understanding and explains that statistical importance should be interpreted with domain knowledge.

IMPLEMENTATION
7.1 Importing Libraries and Data
The implementation begins by importing the required Python libraries. pandas is used for data handling, NumPy for numerical operations, matplotlib and seaborn for visualisation, and scikit-learn for modelling.
The dataset is loaded from a CSV or Excel file. After loading, the first few records, column names, data types, row count, and missing-value summary are checked.
This first step helps confirm whether the file was loaded correctly and whether the target variable is available.
import pandas as pd
import numpy as np
import seaborn as sns
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

df = pd.read_csv("heart_disease.csv")
print(df.head())
print(df.info())

IMPLEMENTATION
7.2 Cleaning the Dataset
Cleaning includes removing duplicates, correcting data types, handling missing values, and reviewing outliers. For categorical variables, labels are standardised so that the same category is not counted separately.
Missing numerical values may be filled with median values when appropriate, while missing categorical values may be filled with the most frequent category or marked as Unknown. The method should be documented.
Outliers are checked with summary statistics and boxplots. In healthcare data, extreme values may represent real cases, so they should not be removed without review.

IMPLEMENTATION
7.3 Exploratory Charts
Exploratory charts are created to understand the distribution of major variables. A histogram of age shows the age group represented in the dataset. Boxplots can compare cholesterol and blood pressure between disease and non-disease groups.
Bar charts are used for categorical variables such as smoking, diabetes, and chest pain type. These charts help identify whether disease cases are more common in particular categories.
The charts provide visual evidence before statistical or model-based ranking is performed.

IMPLEMENTATION
7.4 Correlation Matrix
A correlation matrix is created for numerical variables. The target variable is included after encoding it as a binary value. This allows the analyst to observe which numerical features are more strongly associated with heart disease presence.
The heatmap is formatted with readable labels and values. Strong positive correlations are reviewed carefully because they may indicate direct risk association or indirect relationship through another variable.
The correlation matrix also identifies relationships among input variables, such as age and blood pressure or cholesterol and BMI.
numeric_df = df.select_dtypes(include=["int64", "float64"])
corr = numeric_df.corr()

plt.figure(figsize=(10, 8))
sns.heatmap(corr, annot=True, cmap="coolwarm", fmt=".2f")
plt.title("Correlation Matrix of Heart Disease Variables")
plt.show()

IMPLEMENTATION
7.5 Preparing Data for Modelling
Before modelling, the target variable is separated from input features. Categorical fields are encoded using one-hot encoding or label encoding depending on the model requirement.
The dataset is split into training and testing sets. This prevents the model from being evaluated only on the same data it learned from.
Scaling may be applied for models such as logistic regression, but tree-based models usually do not require scaling.

IMPLEMENTATION
7.6 Training Classification Models
A logistic regression model is trained as an interpretable baseline. It helps understand whether variables increase or decrease the probability of heart disease in a linear model.
A random forest model is also trained because it can handle non-linear relationships and provide feature importance. The model combines multiple decision trees and usually performs well on structured datasets.
The trained models are evaluated using test data and multiple metrics.
from sklearn.model_selection import train_test_split
from sklearn.ensemble import RandomForestClassifier
from sklearn.metrics import classification_report

X = pd.get_dummies(df.drop("target", axis=1), drop_first=True)
y = df["target"]
X_train, X_test, y_train, y_test = train_test_split(X, y, test_size=0.2, random_state=42)

model = RandomForestClassifier(random_state=42)
model.fit(X_train, y_train)
pred = model.predict(X_test)
print(classification_report(y_test, pred))

IMPLEMENTATION
7.7 Calculating Feature Importance
After the random forest model is trained, feature importance values are extracted. These values are sorted from highest to lowest to identify the strongest contributors.
The result is visualised as a bar chart. This chart helps compare the relative importance of age, cholesterol, blood pressure, smoking, diabetes, BMI, chest pain type, and other variables.
The feature-importance output is then compared with the correlation matrix to produce final findings.
importance = pd.Series(model.feature_importances_, index=X.columns)
importance = importance.sort_values(ascending=False)

importance.head(10).plot(kind="barh")
plt.title("Top Heart Disease Risk Factors by Feature Importance")
plt.xlabel("Importance Score")
plt.show()

ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
8.1 Correlation Findings
Correlation analysis usually shows that age, cholesterol, resting blood pressure, maximum heart rate, and related clinical indicators have measurable association with heart disease outcome. The direction and strength of each relationship depends on the dataset.
A positive relationship with the target means that higher values are associated with greater disease presence. A negative relationship may indicate that higher values are associated with lower disease presence, as may happen with maximum heart rate in some datasets.
The report interprets correlation carefully because it does not prove causation and may miss non-linear effects.

ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
8.2 Feature Importance Findings
Feature importance helps identify the strongest model contributors. Variables such as chest pain type, age, maximum heart rate, exercise-induced angina, cholesterol, blood pressure, diabetes, smoking, and BMI may appear among the top predictors depending on dataset structure.
When a factor ranks high in feature importance and also has meaningful medical relevance, it becomes a strong candidate for discussion. For example, age and cholesterol are commonly important because they are closely related to cardiovascular risk.
The project concludes that heart disease risk is multi-factorial. No single variable should be treated as the only cause.

ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
8.3 Comparative Interpretation
Correlation and feature importance do not always produce the same ranking. Correlation captures direct linear association, while feature importance captures model contribution. A factor may have weak correlation but strong importance if it interacts with other variables.
The strongest interpretation comes from comparing both methods. If age, cholesterol, blood pressure, smoking, diabetes, and exercise-related symptoms repeatedly appear as relevant, they should be highlighted in the final findings.
The analysis therefore presents a balanced view instead of depending on one technique.
Age often shows strong risk association.
Cholesterol and blood pressure are important clinical indicators.
Smoking and diabetes represent major lifestyle or metabolic risk signals.
Feature importance helps reveal combined and non-linear effects.

SNAPSHOTS
9.1 Data Cleaning and EDA Screens
The following snapshot descriptions represent the main working screens used during the project. The data cleaning screen shows missing-value checks, duplicate checks, and corrected data types. The exploratory analysis screen shows distributions of age, cholesterol, blood pressure, and disease outcome.
These screens demonstrate that the project followed an organised workflow before building models. Cleaning and EDA are important because model results depend on the quality of input data.
Snapshot placeholders are included so actual screenshots can be inserted if required by the college or guide.
Snapshot
Description
Dataset Preview
First records and column structure
Missing Value Check
Blank fields and invalid records
EDA Charts
Age, cholesterol, BP, and disease outcome distributions

SNAPSHOTS
9.2 Correlation and Feature Importance Screens
The correlation screen contains a heatmap showing relationships among numerical variables. The feature-importance screen contains a sorted bar chart ranking the major predictors.
These outputs directly support the core idea of the project: identifying which factors contribute most to heart disease risk.
The screenshots also help evaluators see the practical output of the analysis rather than only reading theoretical explanation.
Output
Purpose
Correlation Heatmap
Shows strength and direction of relationships
Feature Importance Chart
Ranks variables by model contribution
Evaluation Report
Shows accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score

INTERNSHIP LEARNING OUTCOMES
10.1 Technical Learning
The internship improved my understanding of healthcare data analytics. I learned how to clean structured data, analyse distributions, calculate correlation, train a classification model, and interpret feature importance.
I also learned the difference between statistical association and model contribution. Correlation is useful but limited, while feature importance provides another perspective through model behaviour.
Another important learning outcome was the need for responsible interpretation. Health-related findings must be explained carefully and should not be presented as medical diagnosis.
Data cleaning and preprocessing.
Exploratory data analysis.
Correlation matrix and heatmap.
Classification model evaluation.
Feature-importance interpretation.

INTERNSHIP LEARNING OUTCOMES
10.2 Professional Learning
The internship developed professional qualities such as attention to detail, patience, documentation, and willingness to learn. Healthcare analytics requires careful checking because small mistakes can lead to misleading conclusions.
I learned that technical outputs must be understandable to others. A chart or model result becomes useful only when it is explained in simple language with proper context.
The internship helped me connect classroom learning with a practical data-analysis problem and strengthened my confidence in preparing analytical reports.

CONCLUSION
11.1 Conclusion
The internship project on Risk Factor Analysis of Heart Disease successfully demonstrates how heart disease risk factors can be studied using data analysis methods. The project analyses important variables such as age, cholesterol, blood pressure, smoking, diabetes, BMI, maximum heart rate, chest pain type, and exercise-related symptoms.
The most important learning from the project is that risk is influenced by a combination of factors. Correlation analysis helps identify direct relationships, while feature importance helps rank variables according to model contribution.
This internship at KSR Enterprises provided practical exposure to health-data analysis and improved my ability to prepare professional reports. The knowledge gained through this work will be useful for future academic projects and professional opportunities in data analytics.

CONCLUSION
11.2 Future Enhancements
The project can be improved by using a larger and more diverse dataset. Larger datasets may provide better representation across age groups, gender, lifestyle habits, and clinical conditions.
Advanced models such as gradient boosting, support vector machines, and explainable AI methods like SHAP can be added to improve interpretability. Clinical expert review can also help validate whether the data-driven findings are medically meaningful.
Future work can also include a dashboard for interactive risk-factor exploration and comparison of patient groups.
Use larger and more recent healthcare datasets.
Add SHAP or similar explainable AI methods.
Compare multiple machine learning models.
Include clinically reviewed interpretation.
Create an interactive dashboard for risk-factor exploration.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
12.1 References
World Health Organization. Cardiovascular diseases fact sheets and public health resources.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Heart disease risk factors and prevention resources.
American Heart Association. Cardiovascular risk-factor information and patient education resources.
scikit-learn documentation. Classification models, metrics, and feature-importance references.
pandas documentation. Data manipulation and analysis reference.
NumPy documentation. Numerical computing reference.
seaborn documentation. Statistical data visualisation reference.
matplotlib documentation. Python plotting library reference.
UCI Machine Learning Repository. Heart Disease dataset documentation.
Internship completion certificate issued for Anushka Sharma by KSR Enterprises / S.L.A TRADERS, dated 06-04-2026.

